---
title: disability and theories of justice
date: 2018-12-05 11:28:00 -05:00
published: false
---

I read Michael Berube's book when my son was just an infant, thanks to a friend putting it into my hands. I was desperate in those days for some representation of disability that could connect me to stories outside the sentimentalized parenting narratives that were almost the only thing available at that time. Here, said so many well-meaning people—here is the story of a parent who lived to tell the tale of just how happy their child made them, despite all fears to the contrary.

>Two of the most formidable moral philosophers of our time, both of whose work relies explicitly on the ideal of reciprocity, are Jurgen Habermas and John Rawls. Habermas, whose theory usually goes by the name of "communicative action," focuses on the possibility of locating norms of reciprocity in social practices that enable reflection—chiefly, language. The ideal society, for Habermas, resemble an "ideal speech situation" in which all conversants speak freely in an atmosphere free of domination, coercion, or power asymmetry of any kid, and the possibility of imagining such a society resides, interestingly, in the communicative ideal inherent in language itself. Habermas is routinely criticized, of course—from the right, for being a wishful thinker; from the left, for imagining that some kind of "consensus" will emerge from the ideal speech situation. But interestingly enough, neither the critics from the right nor the critics from the left have been able to argue convincingly that the hypothetical "ideal speech situation," in which all humans discourse as equals, is not in fact ideal.
>
>Rawls takes a wholly different approach, but his 1971 book, *A Theory of Justice*, is nonetheless our century's single most compelling challenge to utilitarian philosophy, and the reason for its cogency is that Rawls, like Habermas, imagines the creation of a social contract in which the ideal of reciprocity precedes any other notion of the right or of the good. In the Rawlsian state, people are governed by two overarching principles, each of which has to be interpreted to fit every new situation and context: "First, each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others. Second: social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both (a) reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage, and (b) attached to positions and offices open to all." By contrast, utilitarianism holds that the just society is that which creates the greatest good for the greatest number. For most of my life I've considered that principle sufficient to my own needs, and Jamie's as well—since, as I fondly imagined, any decent conception of "the greatest number" would certainly include Jamie. And yes, utilitarianism, as social philosophy, is vastly preferable to any social Darwinist regime in which the battle always goes to the strong, the bread always to those whose test scores declare them to be wise. It's also many light-years beyond the adolescent, libertarian conception of a regime in which individual freedom supersedes all other claims to "justice" in a local or collective sense.
>
>But Rawls's "formalist critique of utilitarianism is a forceful one, and it rests on three insuperable problems in utilitarian thought. First, utilitarianism permits some individuals to be disadvantaged so that the collective good, averaged over the entire population, can be enhanced. Most egalitarians would think that's all right: We can deprive the luckiest few of some of the fruits of their advantages so that the rest of us can benefit slightly. As Rawls shows, however, there's nothing in utilitarianism to prevent this logic from working the opposite way. Thus, we might achieve the "greatest good" by allowing 10 percent of the population to reap such extraordinary social benefits that the "collective" good of the society is enhanced, per capita, even if the other 90 percent of the population never sees any of these benefits and can only read about them in the papers. Second, utilitarianism, like libertarianism, doesn't challenge irrational selfishness or eugenics; it merely factors those into the mix. As Rawls puts it, in utilitarianism, "social welfare depends directly and solely upon the levels of satisfaction or dissatisfaction of individuals. Thus if men take a certain pleasure in discriminating against one another, in subjecting others to a lesser liberty as a means of enhancing their self-respect, then the satisfaction of those desires must be weighed in our deliberations according to their intensity, or whatever, along with other desires." Rawls's challenge to this is the idea of "justice as fairness," where fairness entails the principles of reciprocity I mentioned above, and where, from the outset, "an individual who finds that he enjoys seeing others in positions of lesser liberty understands that he has no claim whatever to this enjoyment."
>
>Third and last, utilitarianism does not respect individual idiosyncrasy. This seems to be a strange charge to level against utilitarians, especially if you've just charged them with accepting individuals' idiosyncratic desire to discriminate against each other, but as it happens, it follows from the utilitarian conception of the "greatest good." Put it this way: *Who* determines the greatest good, and on what basis? It turns out that the utilitarian answer to these questions assume that societies might be able to deliberate about such matters if they were composed of one single individual. "The striking feature of the utilitarian view of justice," writes Rawls,
>
>*is that it does not matter, except indirectly, how this sum of satisfactions is distributed among individuals any more than it matters, except indirectly, how one man distributes his satisfactions over time. The correct distribution in either case is that which yields the maximum fulfillment...Here we may note a curious anomaly. It is customary to think of utilitarianism as individualistic, ad certainly there are good reasons for this. The utilitarians were strong defenders of liberty and freedom of thought, and they held that the good of society is constituted by the advantages enjoyed by individuals. Yet utilitarianism is not individualistic...in that, by conflating all systems of desires, it applies to society the principle of choice for one man.*
>
>To think this way, says Rawls, "is not to take seriously the plurality and distinctness of individuals."
>
>Here, then, is where Rawls and Habermas might meet. Deliberations about social justice are not a matter of generalizing from one individual, even if that one individual were so infinitely imaginative that she could experience everyone's attachments and desires as her own. Rather, the ideal of social justice is founded on a collective dialogue—or more precisely, polylogue—in which all social actor contribute their notions of individual and collective good. There's no reason to believe that such a polylogue will end in consensus, but there's every reason to believe that procedurally it's the best idea we humans have yet devised for hashing out the essential decisions that determine *what* we will value and why—as well as what we will mean by the world "value." If that's the case, then we would do well to seek the ground for human justice in our capacity to communicate with one another, regardless of whether we have sustained hearing loss in one ear, regardless of whether we are incapable of uttering proper names, regardless of whether we mumble, regardless of whether we communicate by ASL.
>
>Be our alphabets or our vocabularies what they may, it is through the social practice known as language that we might establish the value of a touchdown or of a human life, The "ground" of justice, in this case, is simply our ability to imagine reciprocity as a ground. 

