---
title: toward me, toward you
date: 2019-07-21 14:49:00 -04:00
published: false
---

It's often said that an essay is "taking an idea for a walk." It's a handy metaphor, whether for reader or for writer—it implies the unfolding of time, a shared journey, surprises and backtracking along the way. So lately I've been thinking that a non-fiction book, when making a series of arguments aimed at multiple and varied readers, is a lengthy negotiation of "walking" that's worked out between author and audience. A bridge comes to mind, with each party at opposite ends, and a writer has to decide: How much will I ask the reader to come to me? And how much will I spend my efforts crossing toward them? Both design and disability, the two topics of my book, tend to find audiences among people who are already connected to the their themes, people who are already convinced of their importance. But I want this book—not all books, but this book—to invite a reader to these subjects who *doesn't* imagine they have much to do with her life. I want her to recognize, in the everyday objects she takes for granted and in the experience of herself or people around her, that design and disability shape the lives of everyone.

How will I frame and present the complexity that comes with any topic that truly warrants a book? How much will I summarize, or analogize, to address the reader without overwhelming her? With key details but without too many detours? Writing a book that uses the *vast* body of disability studies as its backbone requires me to use some generalities and collapse some categories to work at the introductory level. It's not that a reader can't track along with complicated ideas. But to give fewer strong ideas the oxygen, the air and space that they need to really bloom, I've rewritten and cut ruthlessly and rewritten again and again and again. It's all an effort to take ideas for a walk, and to do a bit further crossing of that bridge, take on more of the effort, by extending further from my side.

I heard an echo of this in the question put to Bryan Stevenson about the new film adaptation of his bestselling book, Just Mercy.