---
title: avoiding the high-brow freak show
date: 2017-07-20 11:34:00 -04:00
---

Oliver Sacks is probably the only author many people have read about disability at length. Sacks wrote many books with such a keen eye for description and also a literate, humanitarian lens—he was able to link together ideas in natural history, the sciences, and the humanities with sincerity and warmth, and always with people at the center. But which people? The subjects of the book, or the reader who is "reading" herself, her own experiences, as she takes in these stories? In any good book, many characters are involved: author, characters, reader. But it gets tricky in disability narratives.

It's challenging to write about this subject for a mainstream audience, perhaps because there are so many well-rehearsed pitfall tropes in characterizing bodily and developmental differences. Descriptions of physicality, speech, idiosyncratic movement can slide so easily into spectacle, and revealing the ways that people cope, make sense, create joy and humor in their lives can collapse into inspiration, easily won.

I'm thinking about Sacks as I write my own words, interpreting my own many encounters with disabled people* in a way that both extends a bridge to people for whom the subject appears to be new, to be far from their personal experiences, and also does justice to the integrity and singularity of those people involved. I'm trying to write about disability and its reach into all of human experience, that is, without making individual people in metaphors—having them stand in for some other set of ideas. Those ideas might be laudable—interdependent life, a critique of individualism, all bodies and lived experiences as endless variation, necessarily incomplete in their own ways—but they are ideas nonetheless. How to make this tradeoff—helping the uninitiated reader by saying See, see here, your life is caught up in these stakes too, but without flattening the individual subjects on whom those ideas are based.

I keep circling around this review in the LRB of Sacks's An Anthropologist on Mars and The Island of the Colorblind—analysis of which could also be applied to The Man Who Mistook His Wife For a Hat. Jenny Diski admires Sacks's projects and his craft, but she also has this to say:

Stiffening these characters into meaning! It's a cutting and exact criticism, especially when it seems that Sacks was utterly sincere in his search for human and humane connection—with these patients as clinical subjects and in his engagement with readers.

Sacks got some pushback from scholars in disability studies, too; scholar Tom Shakespeare took a swipe at Sacks as "the man who mistook his patients for a career," calling his body of work a "high-brow freak show." And when I re-read Sacks's New Yorker essay, excerpted from the Anthropologist book, on autistic self-advocate Temple Grandin, I see a little bit what he meant. There is something of the microscope being employed in that encounter, and somehow we walk away fascinated, but maybe less than conjoined to Grandin's experience. It is rich with connection and with pathos (in a good way), but there's distance in it too. So—it's not perfect. And yet: people loved and read that book, saw themselves in it. (And yet—also—Dinski says that Sacks has a way of making meaning out of disability that's essentially a wonder at the human body via its ailments, as in "My God, we are extraordinary, look how interestingly wrong we can go.") Is there a way to affirm the extraordinary without ending at there but for the grace of god...? Without ending with gratitude that we don't share someone's plight? I want readers to come away uncertain: about where there's joy and where there's pain, about how they might make different choices, ordinary and extraordinary choices, if handed a different set of capacities in themselves or in their loved ones.

But can a writer really calibrate that level of nuance? Lately I'm thinking that I can only write what I can write, knowing that it will be incomplete and partial in its rendering. 

I want a world full of disabled voices, people telling their stories in their own ways, with their own voices intact. But I also want a world of people to read about the collective stakes inherent in disability—and not just the rights issues that are being ignored, urgent as they are. I want people to see that spending time thinking about disability is an invitation to see the world differently, and to locate one's own experiences differently. Not to erase the particularity of any one person's very material experiences, but to remedy the invisibility of disabled experience outside the inner circle of people who talk to one another, who know that these issues are important. And some audiences will need some interpretation, some cognitive-linguistic bridges to understand the import of disability—its wonder, its overlooked importance, and yes, even its lessons, if we may call them such. Lessons without moralizing, lessons without abstractions.

*Yes, "disabled people," not "differently abled" or even always "people with disabilities." There's no one right answer or moniker, but soon I'll write a short piece on why "disabled people" is a preferred term among many activists.