---
title: all fundamentalisms
date: 2024-11-29 19:33:00 -05:00
---

David Bentley Hart, [back in 2013](https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-experience-of-god-being-consciousness-bliss-david-bentley-hart/9372125?ean=9780300209358):

>It is true that a great deal of the rhetoric of the new atheism is often just the confessional rote of materialist fundamentalism (which, like all fundamentalisms, imagines that in fact it represents the side of reason and truth); but it is also true that the new atheism has spring up in a garden of contending fundamentalisms. There would not be so many slapdash popular atheist manifestoes, in all likelihood, if there were not so many soft and inviting targets out there to provoke them: young earth creationists who believe that the two contradictory cosmogonic myths of the early chapters of Genesis are actually a single documentary account of an event that occurred a little over six millennia ago, and that there really was a Noah who built a giant ark to rescue a compendious menagerie from a universal deluge, or Hindu nationalists who insist that Rama's Bridge was actually built by Hanuman's monkeys, and so forth. Here, certainly, the new atheism has opponents against which it is well matched.
>
>It should be noted, though, just out of fairness, that the emergence of fundamentalism in the last century was not some sort of retreat to a more original or primitive form of faith. Certainly the rise of the Christian fundamentalist movement was not a recovery of the Christianity of earlier centuries or of the apostolic church. It was a thoroughly modern phenomenon, a strange and somewhat poignantly pathetic attempt on the part of culturally deracinated Christians, raised without the intellectual or imaginative resources of a living religious civilization, to imitate the evidentiary methods of modern empirical science by taking the Bible as some sort of objective and impeccably consistent digest of historical data. It is of course absurd to treat the Bible in that way — though, frankly, no more absurd than thinking that "science shows that God does not exist" — but it also most definitely *not* the way the Bible was read in the ancient or medieval church.

I know so many Gen X folks whose early adulthood was marked by the charisma of the "new" atheist writers in the 2000's and whose imagination for religion has stayed there. And I grew up among many young earth creationists — I can't afford to be quite as condescending as Hart is here — but the twin conundrum remains. 