---
title: the how and the why
date: 2024-06-10 11:08:00 -04:00
---

This is likely to be the first in a series of meditations on the college decision-making process. My two younger kids are embarking on the process now, so I'm thinking about the subject personally; my job as a professor means I'm thinking about that in my workplace, too. And I hardly need to say that the big questions are in the zeitgeist after this academic year: What kind of four-year experiences are worth paying for? What's available in that developmental window that can be nurtured and drawn out in young people? For people who go to college, that period is one of the hinge moments to adulthood that can be formative in lasting ways. How should a parent think about it?

Any time I express consternation about this subject, most people will jump to remind me, with a smug little side-hug, that it's not *me* going to college. And what they mean is: as a parent, my job is to just array the relative choices, affordability-wise, for my children to see clearly, and then to step out of the way while my children choose. Whatever they're into, I'm meant to support it. That's the mature psychological way to do this, the thinking goes. *Don't make it about you*, they say, knowingly. You'd be micro-managing. 

But this is the first of many parenting presuppositions that make up the cultural water we're swimming in and therefore can't see. We imagine our children as maybe-slightly-immature but essentially fully-formed selves. Our job is framed as clearing the obstacles only; we're tasked with whatever passive supports will help our children optimize themselves on their own terms. Whatever the good life is will be self-defined by our kids; who are we, as their parents, to say? The philosopher Agnes Callard calls this "[acceptance parenting](https://thepointmag.com/examined-life/acceptance-parenting/)":

>[P]arents have always aimed at the happiness of their child. What’s radically new is not, at heart, how concerned or permissive we’ve become, but how fully we have given over to our children the job of defining “happiness.” For acceptance parents, neither instinct nor culture is a sufficient guide to what counts as acceptable behavior in a child. Instead of being able to draw on culture and tradition to set standards relative to which children are to be assessed, those standards now come from the people they are to be applied to — more specifically, from *future, which is to say, not yet existent*, versions of those people.

When I talk to fellow parents, I'm reminded that we're all carrying around an incoherent mishmash of ideas about what strong parenting looks like: which behaviors and habits children should choose versus those which parents direct. What good might be offered by chores, or manners, or constraints of any kind. When my teenagers play patiently and attentively with someone's much younger children at a party, people will compliment me warmly: *They were so kind!* I tell them plainly that my kids were instructed to do so — they are no more naturally and "authentically" generous hosts as adolescents than anyone else. We just don't make it optional. And they're old enough now to see the fruits of constraining their natural impulses. When you behave in prosocial ways, the prosocial feeling will often *follow*, not lead.    This is what Callard means by "drawing on culture and tradition" — if I insist, in small ways, that my kids experience the tiny virtues of hospitality by *doing* first, *learning* later, I show them what most global cultures have understood for centuries: that hosting people in one's home is an art and a vital part of the social fabric, and that it's a choice to practice it, with and without authentic fellow-feeling as a precondition. And, needless to say, a parent only earns compliance in constraints if a child also sees his or her choices honored and supported elsewhere. It's a mix that has to be grounded in strong relationship.

I think college should also be a mix of choices and constraints on a young person's natural impulses — which is, of course, the "liberating" ideal of the liberal arts. Some classes you choose, but some you don't — instead, you're exposed to some common educational experiences that set you on a path to freedom. This is freedom in the true sense: by encountering difficult and foreign ideas, we are freed from the natural parochialism of childhood and subculture, and freed from whatever creeds and norms shaped one's family and early schooling. Yuval Levin points to this as the (again, *old* idea) that we need *formation* to be free, rather than the "platforms" that so many of our  So I *don't* think my job is to augment my kids' shopping for a vibe-mood-and-maybe-my-major college experience. I think 

My job as professor has been mostly in engineering and design schools — preprofessional environments that are focused on workforce preparation and an autonomy-first curriculum, in line with the general ethos of higher ed these days. 